education.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Education
permalink: /education/
---

Occasionally I'll create study guides or take notes on my computer. I like to post these online so others can use them too!

I highly encourage contributions to this part of the site! Everything is written and [markdown](http://blanco.io/blog/markup-languages/markdown-is-awesome/) and [MathJax](https://www.mathjax.org/) is used for math formatting.

To start contributing, you'll need to [make a fork](https://help.github.com/articles/fork-a-repo/) of [this site](https://github.com/ZacBlanco/zacblanco.github.io) using GitHub and then once you've made changes, [create a pull request](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-a-pull-request/).

### Courses at Rutgers University

**Freshman Year**

- Spring
  - [(01:750:124) - Analytical Physics 1B](analytical-physics-124/)

**Sophomore Year**

- Fall
  - [(14:332:221) - Principles of Electrical Engineering 1](principles-of-ee-1/)
  - [(01:750:227) - Analytical Physics 2A - Electromagnetism](analytical-physics-227/)
  - [(01:830:321) - Social Psychology](social-psychology/)
  - [(01:198:112) - Data Structures](data-structures/)
- Spring
  - [(14:332:331) - Computer Architecture](comp-arch-332/)
  - [(14:332:222) - Principles of Electrical Engineering 2](principles-of-ee-2/)
  - [(01:198:205) - Discrete Mathematics](discrete-math/)
  - [(14:332:226) - Probability and Random Processes](probability-random-processes/)
  - [(01:640:250) - Intro to Linear Algebra](intro-linear-algebra/)

Commit message:

Adding new courses to edu page
Still need to make folder and links. Will update in the fall.

education.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Education
keywords: rutgers, university, course, notes, electrical, engineering, physics, probability, circuits, psychology, computer, notes, study, review, guide, education
permalink: /education/
---

Occasionally I'll create study guides or take notes on my computer. I like to post these online so others can use them too!

I highly encourage contributions to this part of the site! Everything is written and [markdown](http://blanco.io/blog/markup-languages/markdown-is-awesome/) and [MathJax](https://www.mathjax.org/) is used for math formatting.

To start contributing, you'll need to [make a fork](https://help.github.com/articles/fork-a-repo/) of [this site](https://github.com/ZacBlanco/zacblanco.github.io) using GitHub and then once you've made changes, [create a pull request](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-a-pull-request/).

The courses below are organized by the order in which I took them at Rutgers University. Under each link you should be able to find useful resources for each class and at least one set of notes.

## Courses at Rutgers University

**Freshman Year Courses**

- Spring
  - [(01:750:124) - Analytical Physics 1B](analytical-physics-124/)

**Sophomore Year Courses**

- Fall
  - [(14:332:221) - Principles of Electrical Engineering 1](principles-of-ee-1/)
  - [(01:750:227) - Analytical Physics 2A - Electromagnetism](analytical-physics-227/)
  - [(01:830:321) - Social Psychology](social-psychology/)
  - [(01:198:112) - Data Structures](data-structures/)
- Spring
  - [(14:332:331) - Computer Architecture](comp-arch-332/)
  - [(14:332:222) - Principles of Electrical Engineering 2](principles-of-ee-2/)
  - [(01:198:205) - Discrete Mathematics](discrete-math/)
  - [(14:332:226) - Probability and Random Processes](probability-random-processes/)
  - [(01:640:250) - Intro to Linear Algebra](intro-linear-algebra/)
  
**Junior Year Courses**

- Fall
  - (14:332:231) - Digital Logic Design
  - (14:332:345) - Linear Systems and Signals
  - (14:332:361) - Electronic Devices
  - (01:198:214) - Systems Programming
