---
layout: page
title: CSE 221 - Operating Systems - Notes on "The Origin of the VM/370 Time-Sharing System"
permalink: /education/grad/cse221/11-5/vm370/
keywords: CSE, 221, UCSD, UC, San Diego, software, operating, system, linux, C, OS
description: Notes for "The Origin of the VM/370 Time-Sharing System"
mathjax: true
---

> Q: Microkernels and virtual machine monitors are two different ways to
> support the execution of multiple operating systems on modern
> hardware. How does the microkernel approach in L4 compare and
> constrast with the VMM approach in Xen?

Answer:

## Intro

- Published Sept. 1981
- Virtual Machine Facility/370 --> VM/370
    - three parts:
        - CP (control program)
        - CMS (conversational monitor system)
        - RSCS (remote spooling and communication subsystem)
    - form general purpose tool for delivery of computing resources to a
      wide variety of people
- CP is an OS that simulates multiple copies of the same machine.

## Historical

- Machines took a good chunk of time to obtain access to
- Often sat idle waiting for jobs
- adding management and resource sharing allowed for better utilization
  of resources
- Changed from batch to interactive work over a period of time
- System Influence from MIT CTSS - necessitated modular design
- HW Influence - how to design a single OS
    - original IBM design could not move programs in memory after they
      had been prepared for execution.
- virtual mem influence
    - memory split page frames stored on drums
- design goals
    - design/modification of OS itself had not been addressed
- virtual machine cannot be compromised by the operation of another machine.
    - must be private, secure, and reliable.

## Control Program

- program can be executed by the machine, or by hand by a user
    - a computer could be programmed to replace the "user evaluating by hand"
- general multiprogramming system that uses virtual machine to organize
  "job streams"
- every vm identified by an entry in CP directory
    - hw directly assigned device
- can add/delete hardware components
- think of CP as physical machine operator (can plug/unplug components)
- CP gives choice of any software- console specifies initial load

## Conversational Monitor System

- single user system providing function like MIT's CTSS
- disk-file oriented OS.
- share data via connections established by CP between VMs
- CMS resides in low memory to prevent destruction of metadata
    - user programs can still modify or run privileged instructions.
- user input from terminal, files, or exec processor


## Remote Spooling and Communications

- RSCS interrupt driven multi-tasking system using a dedicated computer
  with attached comms equipment.
- support data transfer between workstations.
- information flows between VMs created by the CP in simplest case (same HW)
- RSCS routes information using unique identifiers for each system.
  Routes between CPs, then to final destination?

